# govm
vagrant-wrapper or govm (which is called govm because it will be implemented in go in the future with a proper API) is 
currently a shell-wrapper for vagrant with virtualbox as provider. It has a lot of functions: 
- create one single virtual-machine with a [single-creation](#single-creation)
- run any action you know from vagrant on these machines
- create a group of virtual machines with multiple config-files each representing a virtual machine with a [group-creation](#group-creation)
- manage the group with the known commands (destroy/start/halt) with some syntax sugar
- [export](#exporting) a group or one virtual machine as an .ova file
- easy import of [main.ova](#mainova) file with a `.exe` file
- configure everthing that govm is controlling via [govm.cfg](#govmcfg)

# Installation
NOTE: You need sudo or admin priviliges to run any of the prewritten scripts.

```
git clone https://github.com/No1Lik3U/vagrant-wrapper.git
```
`cd` into the directory and change the permissions of `install.sh` to be executable:
```
cd vagrant-wrapper/ && sudo chmod u+x install.sh
```
Before you run the script be sure to read [this](#installsh) otherwise you may have an unexpected outcome.
```
./install.sh && rm install.sh
```

If you can't or do not want to use one of the pre-written scripts make sure that all the [requirements](#requirements) are installed.

Also be sure that you have set the right values in [govm.cfg](#govmcfg) and then you are ready to go :)
For more information about govm read the [documentation](#documentation).

# Requirements
The only requirements are [HashiCorp Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/) and [Oracle VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/).
Because we don't want to waste your time, there are some pre-written **init-scripts** for [wsl](init/wsl.sh) and [ubuntu](init/linux.sh) which will
install all requirements and make some adjustements needed for `govm` to work properply. If you decide to run one of the init scripts be sure to reboot your local machine and then start using govm. 

IMPORTANT: do not use govm directly after using the init script! There may occur an error which is discussed in [this](#init) section (even though you did not use govm directly afterwards).

## init: wsl
The init script wsl.sh will install `Chocolatey`, `Oracle VirtualBox` and `HashiCorp Vagrant`. 
It will also try to create a `Host-Only Ethernt Adapter` with the `IPv4: 192.168.56.1/24` but it may fail because a reboot is needed before using VirtualBox-API `vboxmanage`. Because of this it may occur an error which can be [solved](#init). This is only the windows part. For HashiCorp Vagrant to run properly using wsl there are some `env-variables`
needed. 
1. `export VAGRANT_WSL_ENABLE_WINDOWS_ACCESS="1"`
2. `export PATH="$PATH:/mnt/c/Program Files/Oracle/VirtualBox"` 

These env-Variables will be appended to your `~/.bashrc` so they will be permanently set.
Because govm is using some `sudo` commands for removing and creating folders you may be
asked to enter a password. This is obviously killing the User-Experience so the init script 
will also create a file at `/etc/sudoers.d/<username>` and will allow the current user to run any
sudo commands without entering the password `<username> ALL = PASSWD:ALL`.

## init: ubuntu
This init script will do the same as [wsl](#wslsh) but for ubuntu/debian. 
This script is created for ubuntu and may be used for other linux-distrubutions 
that use the `apt` package manager.

## install.sh
If you wish to install all requirements using the pre-written init-scripts follow the instructions described in [installation](#installation). It will autmatically detect if you are using wsl and then run the wsl.sh script. If you are not using wsl it will always take the ubuntu.sh script and will not check for further `OSTYPE` information.


# Documentation
The following sections will explain in detail how to use `govm`. Before you start reading the documentation here are some conventions:
1. `vm.cfg` is always representing a virtual-machine config file. For the purpose of the documentation it is named uniformerly. But your config files can be named in any way you like.
2. `-someflag [options]` options is always referring to the options explained in the [Usage](#usage) section.
3. `$VARIABLE` is meaning that this variables can be set by you via the config file or it is an intern variable that is generated. For example `$GOVM-ID` is referring to the `hex-id` that is generated by `govm` for the virtual-machine for future unique references. (obviously $HOME, $PATH etc... have still the same linux meaning) 
4. `govm.XXX` means that the value definied in `govm.cfg` will be used.
5. `<config-option>: <default-value> -[opt|req]`. Using this syntax helps to simplify  which defaults the config-options in the different config files have and if they are **required(req)** or **optional(opt)**
6. If you wish to have the default for a value just comment out the parameter in the config file.

## Usage
`-v [up|halt|start|ssh|destroy|export]` is specifing the govm-command that should be run. Prefixing the command with a `g` e.g `gdestroy` will run the command as a `group-command`<br/>
`-f [path]` path to a `vm.cfg`. <br/>
`-g [path]` specifing a directory with one or more `vm.cfg` files each representing a virtual machine. <br/>
`-m [$GOVM-ID]` the virtual machine which should be manipulated by the specified `-v` command<br/>
`-i` if present the group or virtual machine is getting exported as [main.ova](#mainova). <br/>
`-r` if present it will force a `recreation` of the virtual-machine if there is a virtual-machine registered but not reachable. You may also use it to  `reload` a virtual machine or group.  
`-l` listing all virtual-machine created by `govm` with some extra meta-information. <br/>

If you wish to list all virtual-machines with some additional information run `govm -l`. <br/>

Every command should start as following `govm -v [options]`. This way every command is properly structured and human readable. <br/>

If you run the command `govm -v [options]` without specifiying `-f`, `-g` or `-m` govm will run the defined command on the `default.cfg` virtual-machine. <br/>

# Config
Config files are the way that govm can be manipulated and controlled to serve your purpose. There are two types of `.cfg files`.
1. `vm.cfg` which is representing a virtual machine and the [configuration](#vmcfg) it should have.
2. `govm.cfg` . This [file](#govmcfg) is controlling the software as a whole e.g. metadata and storing information.

## vm.cfg 
In the following you will be introduced to all the config options with a detailed explanation what the option will affect.

`CPU: govm.CPU -opt` <br/>
Quantity of proceccors 
for the virtual-machine. 
`min: 1`, `max: 100`

`RAM: govm.RAM -opt` <br/>
Amount of memory for the virtual-machine. 
`min: 512 MB` `max: 16000 MB`.

`OS_IMAGE: govm.OS_IMAGE -opt` <br/>
Base Box that vagrant should use 
for setting the operating-system.
If you use windows be sure that
the `OS_TYPE` is also set to windows.
All possible base-boxes can be found [here](https://app.vagrantup.com/boxes/search?provider=virtualbox).

`OS_TYPE: linux -opt` <br/>
Is informing the application
which type of operating-system you are
using. This is needed because as always windows
needs some special configurations in the vagrantfile.
Valid values are linux and windows. This option
will be ignored if you use your own Vagrantfiles.

`SCRIPT: govm.SCRIPT -opt` <br/>
Provision script that will run for the virtual-machine.
If you wish to have the minimum of provision
its recommended to take [provision/default.sh](provision/default.sh)
which is only doing an update and upgrade on the system.
Every path has to be set relative to the `govm.PROVISION_DIR`.

`HOST_ONLY_IP: 192.168.56.2 -req` <br/>
IPv4-Address of the Host-Only-Virtual-Adapter 
for the virtual-machine.
NOTE: 192.168.56.2 is reserved for 
the default virtual-machine so do not use it!

`VM_NAME: $GOVM-ID -opt` <br/>
Name of the virtual-machine.

`SYNC_DIR: $VMSTORE/$GOVM-ID/SYNC_DIR -opt` <br/> 
The directory that should be mounted 
from host to guest. The default 
is a created directory called
`sync_dir` in the home directory
of the guest-machine which will be mounted to
`govm.VMSTORE/$GOVM-ID/sync_dir`. 


`DISK_SIZE_PRIMARY: 40GB -opt` <br/>
Disk-Size of primary disk of the virtual-machine.  
NOTE: Because this feature is currently
experimental there are some issues with `wsl`.
Because of this it is not recommend to use it with `wsl`.
For more Information read [Disk size](#Disk-Size) <br/>

`DISK_SIZE_SECOND: nil -opt` <br/>
If you would like to have
a second disk attached to your
virtual machine you can 
set a disk-size here
otherwise there is only
one attached <br/>

`MOUNTING_POINT: nil` <br/>
Mounting point of the second disk. By definition all mounting point paths has to be an absolute path so it has to start with a `/`. All mounting paths are supported beside: 
- `/root`
- `/`
- `/boot`
- `/var`

IMPORTANT: always start your path
with a double // if using git-bash. This prevents that the
path is getting converted by `mingw`. 
This variable is required if `DISK_SIZE-SECOND` is set otherwise it is getting ignored <br/>

`FILE_SYSTEM: nil` <br/>
mkfs for the second disk. Valid values are:
- `ext3`
- `ext4`
- `xfs` <br/>

This variable is required if `DISK_SIZE-SECOND` is set otherwise it is getting ignored.

NOTE: The second disk will be attached to your virtual-machine but you have to mount it to a mounting point. YOu can do it manually or in your provision script. There is also a pre-written [script](provision/linux/default.sh) which will do it for you. So it's recommended to use the pre-written script and add any further provision task to the script.

`CUSTOME_VARIABLES: () -opt` <br/>
Variables that you want to access 
in your provision script.
It is an array seperated with 
whitespace e.g. ("KEY:VALUE" "KEY:VALUE").
If you just declare an string in the array 
then this will be taken as key and value i.e. 
("something") -> ("something:something")

SPECIAL-VARIABLES:
1. `os_user:username`: if this is set this users home-directory will be used as the `SYNC_DIR`.

`VAGRANTFILE: .govm/vagrantfiles/linux` <br/>
Vagrantfile that should be used for the virtual-machine. It has to be 
relative to the `govm.VAGRANTFILE_DIR`. If no `VAGRANTFILE_DIR` is set 
the options is optional otherwise it is required.

## govm.cfg
In the following you will be introduced to all the config options with a detailed explanation what the option will affect.

`VMSTORE: $HOME/.govm -opt` <br/>
Location where the metadata 
of every created virtual-machine 
is getting saved. 
NOTE: if you are using wsl
you have to use a path
pointing to a location in the
windows system i.e. `/mnt/c/<user>/some/dir` <br/>

`APPLIANCSTORE: $HOME/.govm_appliance -opt` <br/>
Location where the .ova files will be created
and saved. <br/> 

`BRIDGE_OPTIONS: nil -req` <br/>
Possible networks virtual-box can use to bridge
to. It is an array seperated by whitespace
e.g. ("first network" "second network") <br/>

`LOG: govm.VMSTORE/$GOVM-ID/logs -opt` <br/>
Location wehere the logging is made. 

`VAGRANTFILE_DIR: .govm/vagrantfiles -opt` <br/>
Location of all your custome vagrantfiles. For creating your custome `Vagrantfiles` you have to follow some [rules](#custome-vagrantfile).

`CONFIG_DIR: vagrant-wrapper/config -opt` <br/>
Directory where you would like to store your groups and vm.cfg. 
The structure of the directories has a [meaning](#project-structure). <br/>

`PROVISION_DIR: vagrant-wrapper/provision -opt` <br/>
Directory with all your provisions-scripts. <br/>

In `govm.cfg` are also some globally defined default values for the 
virtual-machine `cfg` files which are required to be present. 
These are `CPU` `RAM` `OS_IMAGE` `SCRIPT`. There are already some defaults 
set for you in the present [govm.cfg](.govm/govm.cfg) but feel free to change them. 

# Creation process
There are two types of creation-processes [single-creation](#single-creation) and [group-creation](#group-creation). Even though a group-creation can be started with one `vm.cfg` it is highly recommended to use the single-creation for two reasons:
1. security 
2. faster creation time

`govm` is running some other validations if [single-creation](#single-creation) is used instead of [group-creation](#group-creation)

## single-creation
Single-creation is the process of creating one virtual-machine with an optional provided
vm.cfg file representing the configs of the virtual-machines.

To start a single-creation you have two options:
1. You can run `govm -v up`. This will create a virtual machine based on the [default.cfg](.govm/default.cfg).
2. You can run `govm -v up -f your/vm/config/path`. This will create a virtual-machine based on the `.cfg` that you provided.

After the virtual machine is created your are able to interact with it by using the `$GOVM-ID` of the virtual-machine created by `govm`.
The syntax for any interaction with the virtual machine is `govm -v [options] -m $GOVM-ID`.

## group-creation
Group-creation is the process of creating multiple virtual-machines based on a directory
which contains multiple vm.cfg files.

To start a group-creation you have to run `govm -v gup -g path/to/dir`

After the group is created you can interact with the each virtual-machine as it would be a [`single-creation`](#single-creation).
For some **syntax-sugar** there are some **group-commands** as described in [usage](#usage) like `gdestroy` or `ghalt` 
which will run the given command on the whole group so you dont have to run a single command by hand on every virtual-machine in the same group.

## Exporting
Exporting is the possibility to export a group or a single 
virtual-machine as an `.ova` file which then can be used in every
Type-2 virtualization to import the created Environment.

This feature is a great way to create an `Environment`, have it saved as an `.ova` file and thne used it with any Type-2-Provider. 
This is giving you the possibility to keep your `GUI` clean from **dead virtual-machines**. 

### How is the .ova filename generated?

For a single-export `govm -v export -f some/cfg/file` the name of the virtual-machine will be used.
For a group-export `govm -v gexport -g some/dir` the directory name is used for the name of the `.ova` file.

After the first part of the name is calculated a versioning will be calculated. The versioning is based on [semver](https://semver.org/) standard with a small simplification. So the end result will be: `$VM_NAME-v1.0.ova` or `Group-Dir-Name-v1.0.ova`.

### main.ova

`main.ova` is a special kind of `.ova` file. This file is the .ova file which will be used by [import.exe](.govm/pkg/exe). `import.exe` will automatically import `main.ova` into `VirtualBox`. This is especially useful if you have multiple computers that all can import with one click the `main.ova` and are ready to go with the prepared virtual-machine `Environemt`. It is currently experimental so it will propably not function correctly.

## Custome Vagrantfile

With `govm` you can also provide your own custome `Vagrantfile` that should be used instead of the [default](.govm/vagrantfiles/) vagrantfiles. If you would like to use a custome Vagrantfile there are some rules that you have to follow for a proper integration of your custome `Vagrantfile`. 

### govm variables
There are some variables which will be exported into the current shell-session via the `export` keyword by govm. These variables can be accesses in your `Vagrantfile` by using `ENV["VARIABLE_NAME"]`. The variables which are accessible are all config parameters which you can set in the [vm.cfg](#vmcfg).

### Custome variables
Of course govm can't cover all options that a user may want to have. Because of this the `CUSTOME_VARIABLES` were introduced. Here you can declare based on the syntax explained [here](#vmcfg) your custome variables that you would like to use in your `Vagrantfile`. Because the `CUSTOME_VARIABLES` is a formatted string which has to be converted into a ruby `hash` before they can be used in the `Vagrantfile` the followeing code-snippet has always to be used to achieve this. 
```ruby
hash_string=ENV["CUSTOME_VARIABLES_STRING"]
hash_arr = hash_string.split(',')
hash = {}
hash_arr.each do |e|
  pair = e.split(':')
  key=pair[0]
  value=pair[1]
  hash[key] = value
end
```
Afterwards every defined custome variables of your vm.cfg is also accesible by using `hash["KEY"]`. There is already a [template](./vagrantfiles/linux) for creating proper custome `Vagrantfiles`. That template should be used as a base for every `Vagrantfile` that you want to create.

### Gotchas
Changing the `VAGRANTFILE_DIR` will change the behavior of the [single-screation](#single-creation) of the `default.cfg` This is because if you choose to have a custome `Vagrantfile` every variable defined in [vm.cfg](#vmcfg) will be optional and one new argument will be required: `VAGRANTFILE` which is not set in the [default.cfg](.govm/default.cfg). But you can set a `VAGRANTFILE` for [default.cfg](.govm/default.cfg) then it will work properly. which one? Thats on you but it has to be relative to the `VAGRANTFILE_DIR`.

## Testing
The first valid command that you will run will trigger an `integrationtest` which is assuring that every functionality is working properly. If the testing was successfull an empty file named `tested` will be created, which is informing `govm` that the `integrationtest` was already ran successfully. Don't worry you will see some error messages that are intentionally or known issues that will not influence any functionalities.

# WSL
As always there are some specialities needed for `windows (wsl)`. We tried to cover as much as possible but still there are some limitation
compared to a native linux machine.

## Disk-Size
Because the disk-size config in vagrant is currently [experimental](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/disks/usage) there are still some issues using it with WSL. There is a way around using `Git-Bash` but it is not recommended to use it, if you wish to work with wsl afterwards to manage those virtual-machines.

# Best-practices
Here are some best practices that you may follow. It is just a recommendation because the software was mostly tested with these practices and will promise
a flawless experience.

## Project structure
The project structure can be what ever you want. But it is recommened to use the structure which will be present after you clone the repository.

`.govm` <br/>
This directory contains directories and files that are used by the software to function properly. The only files that should be changed by you are
`govm.cfg` and `default.cfg`.

`configs` <br/>
In this directory you can define your virtual-machine `vm.cfg` files. If you want to create a `group` of virtual-machines
create a directory with the name of the group and insert all `vm.cfg` files into that new directory e.g.
```
📦config
 ┣ 📂ansible
 ┃ ┣ 📜controll.cfg
 ┃ ┗ 📜master.cfg
 ┣ 📂redis
 ┃ ┣ 📜master.cfg
 ┃ ┗ 📜replica.cfg
 ┣ 📜test.cfg
 ┗ 📜windows.cfg
```
the directory name will be used as the [filename](#how-is-the-ova-filename-generated) of the `.ova` file. <br/>

`provision` <br/>
Every provision script or other types of provision should be located here. The structure of the directory is up to you. If you are using an other provision directory other than the default one be sure to set it as `PROVISION_DIR` in `govm.cfg`. All `SCRIPT` values in any `vm.cfg` file should be releative to `PROVISION_DIR`.

`vagrantfiles` <br/>
If you would like to use a custome made [vagrantfile](#custome-vagrantfile) then these should be located here. The directory structure is not important to govm but be sure to set the corret `VAGRANTFILE_DIR`.

## Naming
Because the names of your directories in the `configs` direcroty and virtual-machine names [matter](#how-is-the-ova-filename-generated) it is a good idea to choose the names that they represent the purpose of the virtual-machine or the group like you can see in the example tree-structure above.

# Errors
Errors are something nobody likes! Thats a fact! But they will always be a part of software. The following sections are describing how to [interpretated](#interpretation) some custome defined errors and some known [issues](#known-issues-and-possible-fixes) and possible fixes.

## Interpretation 
If you see anytime an error message with `nil` then this means
that some option was not set which is required if you are using
one other option. For example: if you would like to have
an additional disk with the option `DISK_SIZE_SECOND` but your are not
setting the `FILE_SYSTEM` for it, then you will see that type of error message.

## Init
Running the init script will install all requirements and setup the environment for `govm` to work properly. After a reboot of your local machine you can use govm. In some cases it may occur an error that vagrant is not able to start the virtual-machine. There are three possible solutions for this error:
1. Use govm after a reboot of the local machine once the init script is finished.
2. Deactive and activate the `VirtualBox Host-Only Ethernet Adapter` and reboot your local machine afterwards.
3. Delete all `VirtualBox Host-Only Ethernet Adapter` and create one without a `dhcp-server` and with the `IPv4 192.168.56.1/24`.



## Known issues and possible fixes

- https://github.com/hashicorp/vagrant/issues/6736  
  - `FIX: chcp.com 1252` 
- https://github.com/moby/moby/issues/24029  
  - `FIX: start every mounting path with a double slash in the config file`
- https://stackoverflow.com/questions/14219092/bash-script-and-bin-bashm-bad-interpreter-no-such-file-or-directory
- https://stackoverflow.com/questions/11616835/r-command-not-found-bashrc-bash-profile
